docs(cluster-variables): document metadata bag (#9487)
camunda/camunda-docs: docs/components/modeler/feel/cluster-variable/metadata.md

---
id: cluster-variable-metadata
title: Metadata
sidebar_label: "Metadata"
description: "Attach and filter searchable key-value metadata on cluster variables."
---

Attach a searchable key-value metadata bag to a cluster variable so consumers can discover and filter variables by semantic metadata without inspecting the variable's value.

## About metadata

Each cluster variable can carry an optional `metadata` bag: a map of string keys to scalar values. Metadata is stored alongside the variable but kept separate from its `value`.

> Use metadata to annotate variables with information that helps consumers find them. For example, a credential stored as a cluster variable can be annotated with `kind=CREDENTIAL`, `schemaRef=io.camunda.connector.slack:1`, and `schemaVersion=2`, so a client can query for all variables that match those attributes without knowing the variable's actual content.

Reviewer: 🔧 I understand this is here because this was the original example, but can we make this example less specific to credentials and connectors? Especially as `kind` is no longer relevant in the metadata in the first place.

How about something like:

```suggestion
Use metadata to annotate variables with information that helps consumers find them. For example, a cluster variable holding a country's VAT rate could be annotated with category=TAX_RATE, region=EU, and year=2026, so a client can query for all tax rates for a given region and year without knowing the variable's actual content.
```

Author: yeah, makes more sense. let me change the example in this case, this documentation would confuse the user with the actual `kind` parameter used as well, yeah

## Structure and constraints

- Keys are strings.
- Values must be **scalars — strings or numbers only**. Booleans, arrays, and objects are rejected when creating or updating a variable.
- A bag is limited to **100 entries** and a configurable maximum serialized size. By default this allows up to 100 entries, each with a key up to 256 characters and a value up to 8192 characters.

Requests that exceed these limits, or that use an unsupported value type, are rejected at the API boundary.

## Metadata is not part of the runtime value

The metadata bag is never exposed in the FEEL-accessible value. When a process evaluates `camunda.vars.env.<name>` (or the `cluster`/`tenant` namespaces), it resolves to the variable's `value` field only — metadata keys never appear. See [how to use cluster variables](./usage-guide.md) for FEEL access patterns.

## Set metadata

Set metadata when creating or updating a cluster variable through the [Orchestration Cluster API](/apis-tools/orchestration-cluster-api-rest/specifications/create-global-cluster-variable.api.mdx). For example:

```json

> {
>   "name": "SLACK_CREDENTIAL",
>   "scope": "GLOBAL",
>   "value": { "token": "xoxb-..." },
>   "metadata": {
>     "kind": "CREDENTIAL",
>     "schemaRef": "io.camunda.connector.slack:1",
>     "schemaVersion": 2
>   }
> }

Reviewer: 🔧 Let's than also rely on a more generic example that users can relate with.

```suggestion
{
  "name": "DE_VAT_RATE",
  "scope": "GLOBAL",
  "value": { "rate": 0.19 },
  "metadata": {
    "category": "TAX_RATE",
    "region": "EU",
    "year": 2026
  }
}
```

```

Metadata is returned on every get and search response.

## Filter by metadata

The [search cluster variables](/apis-tools/orchestration-cluster-api-rest/specifications/search-cluster-variables.api.mdx) endpoint accepts a `metadata` filter: a map of metadata key to an advanced filter on that key's value. Each key supports the following operators:

| Operator                     | Description                               |
| ---------------------------- | ----------------------------------------- |
| `$eq`                        | Equal to the provided value.              |
| `$neq`                       | Not equal to the provided value.          |
| `$exists`                    | Whether the metadata key is present.      |
| `$gt`, `$gte`, `$lt`, `$lte` | Numeric range comparisons (numbers only). |
| `$in`                        | Matches any of the provided values.       |

> | `$like`                      | Matches a wildcard pattern (strings).     |

Reviewer: 🤔 I wonder if we should leave these filters out here and just keep the reference to the API docs. I don't know what we'd add, but adding any filter would cause a mismatch between the API and this page.

> A bare value is shorthand for `$eq` (exact match); use the operator form only when you need one of the operators above. Multiple metadata keys are combined with `AND`, and metadata filters can be combined with other filters such as `scope` and `name`. For example, to find all variables of kind `CREDENTIAL` for a given schema at version `2` or higher:

Reviewer: 🔧 Also changing the example

```suggestion
A bare value is shorthand for `$eq` (exact match); use the operator form only when you need one of the operators above. Multiple metadata keys are combined with `AND`, and metadata filters can be combined with other filters such as `scope` and `name`. For example, to find all variables of category `TAX_RATE` for the given year `2024` or higher:
```

```json
{
  "filter": {
    "scope": "GLOBAL",
    "metadata": {
      "kind": "CREDENTIAL",
      "schemaRef": "io.camunda.connector.slack:1",
      "schemaVersion": { "$gte": 2 }
    }
  }

> }

Reviewer: 🔧 Same example change

```suggestion
{
  "filter": {
    "scope": "GLOBAL",
    "metadata": {
      "category": "TAX_RATE",
      "region": "EU",
      "year": { "$gte": 2024 }
    }
  }
}
```
